A Spatial Analysis of Elevated Blood Lead Levels in the Twin Cities
Metropolitan Region
================
Erin Franke and Nicholas Di,
May 6, 2022

# Introduction

When raising a child, parents go through lots of stress to keep their
children safe and healthy. From using car seats to getting children
vaccinated to working on speech and mobility development and beyond,
there is a lot to think about. But one aspect that may be overlooked in
providing safe and healthy environment for a child is lead. Lead in
paint, soil, air, or water is invisible to the naked eye and has no
smell (“Prevent Children’s Exposure to Lead” 2021). However, children
can be exposed to lead in a variety of manners, including swallowing
house dust or soil contaminated by lead paint or drinking water
delivered through lead-based pipes, faucets, and plumbing fixtures.
Exposure to this hidden element can seriously harm a child’s health,
including damage to the child’s brain and nervous system, slowed growth
and development, as well as learning, hearing, speech, and behavior
problems (“Prevent Children’s Exposure to Lead” 2021). If exposed to
especially high levels of lead, children can face a brain condition
known as encephalopathy, severe neurological damage, comas, and even
death (“Annual Elevated Blood Lead Levels” 2020). Thus, without a
question it is crucial to keep lead exposure to a minimum when raising a
child.

In this project, we analyzed elevated blood lead levels in the **7
county Twin Cities metropolitan area** using public data provided by the
**Minnesota Department of Health** over the period of 2015-2019 (Health,
n.d.). To protect the privacy of individuals, the smallest granularity
we were able to obtain this data was on the census tract level, meaning
for each of the 691 census tracts in the Twin Cities metropolitan area
we obtained information on how many children were tested and how many of
those tests resulted in elevated blood lead levels. To have **elevated
blood lead levels (EBLLs)** means that a child has a confirmed result
**at or above 5 micrograms of lead per deciliter of blood (mcg/dL)**
(“Annual Elevated Blood Lead Levels” 2020). Children under 6 years of
age are tested. The Minnesota Department of Health identifies children
living in the Minneapolis and Saint Paul city limits as children at a
higher risk for lead exposure and recommends these children to receive
blood lead testing at 1 and 2 years of age. This recommendation is
warranted given that in 2019, between 1-2% of children in Minneapolis or
St. Paul had EBLLs, which is double the statewide average and higher
than any other region of Minnesota (“Annual Elevated Blood Lead Levels”
2020). Interestingly, the MDH has found children living in the Metro
area but not living in the cities of Minneapolis or St. Paul are at a
lower risk of lead exposure than the Greater Minnesota (non-Metro) are.
Only about 0.3% of these children have elevated blood lead levels
whereas about 0.8% of children living in MN outside the metro area have
elevated blood lead levels. As a result, to best explore this contrast
between Minneapolis-Saint Paul and the suburban region, this project
will solely focus on EBLL data from the 7 county Twin Cities metro area.
This region is shown in navy on the road map of Minnesota below.

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-2-1.png)<!-- -->

# Research Goal

Keeping the health consequences of lead exposure to children in the
front of our minds, our research focuses on investigating what is
correlated with a census tract having a noticeably high proportion of
children testing with elevated blood lead levels. We defined a tract to
be a “high lead tract” if at least 1% of the tests in the tract resulted
in elevated blood lead levels (meaning 5+ mcg lead/dL). This left us
with 106 “high lead” tracts and 585 “safe” tracts. The location of these
“high lead” tracts in the Twin Cities metropolitan area can be seen
below in red. It is clear that the majority of them fall in the
Minneapolis-Saint Paul city limits.

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-3-1.png)<!-- -->

The reason why this research question is important is because
understanding what is correlated with tracts having high lead levels can
help the Minnesota Department of Health, organizations, and families
protect children from lead exposure. For example, it wouldn’t be
unreasonable to expect tracts with older homes to have higher lead
levels, as these homes are more likely to have been built when science
did not know the harms of lead pipes and paint. On March 28, 2022, Saint
Paul Mayor Melvin Carter announced a $14.5 million American Rescue Plan
investment to remove thousands of lead pipes across the city (n.d.). If
home age appears a strong indicator of high lead levels, identifying
tracts with old homes, high lead levels, and lots of young children can
alert the city to replace their pipes first. In our research we also
might search for a relationship between testing, income, and lead
levels. If we are to find certain income groups getting tested more or
less than others holding other variables constant, we can shed light on
that and advocate for resources to get specific tracts the testing they
need and deserve given their exposure.

To help us understand what is correlated with a tract being “high lead,”
we will need more than just the information provided by the MDH of tract
lead levels. Using the **tidycensus** (Walker and Herman 2022) package
in R, we can access a plethora of information on each census tract
including its estimated mean age, mean income, population, proportion of
family households, home age, and so much more. We begin by exploring the
relationship between many of these variables and testing as well as
EBLLs.

# Exploratory Data Analysis

## Estimated Home Age and EBLLs

One of the first variables we decided to explore was estimated home age.
Using the tidycensus package, we were able to access the number of
residences in each census tract built prior to 1950, between 1950-1959,
1960-1969, etc. We made these variables proportions by dividing the
number of homes built in each time period by the total number of homes
in the census tract. Most revealing was the proportion of homes built
prior to 1950 - as seen in the map below, the Minneapolis-Saint Paul
city limits are largely composed of these older homes while the tracts
on the outskirts of the city have few very homes built before 1950.

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)<!-- -->

Given this visualization and our knowledge of history, it is clear that
home age likely plays a strong role in lead exposure in children. But it
can’t be the only factor. In the map below, we again identify tracts
with at least 1% of tests registering with elevated blood lead levels.
These tracts are colored red and pink, though *in the pink tracts less
than 25% of homes were built before 1950*. We see these pink tracts
generally are located outside the MSP city limits in more recently
developed suburban areas.

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-5-1.png)<!-- -->

Comparing these pink tracts we have denoted as “high lead” tracts that
contain less than 25% of homes built before 1950 to tracts we have
denoted as having safe lead levels, there are a few things to notice.
Our first thought was that perhaps these pink tracts were still
significantly older than the safe lead level tracks and were just built
largely in the 1960s and 70s. Lead-based paint and lead-contaminated
dust are the most common sources of lead poisoning, and paint containing
lead was not banned in the United States until 1978 (“Common Sources of
Lead Poisoning,” n.d.). Therefore, any home built prior to 1978 could
certainly serve as an exposure threat to children. It ended up that on
average 56.1% percent of the homes in the pink tracts were built before
1979 compared to 54.8% of homes in the safe lead tracts. With such a
small difference, there has to be something else correlated with a
higher proportion of tests with EBLLs in particular tracts. Looking into
other variables, we found the pink high lead tracts have a slightly
higher population density at about 2 people/1000 m<sup>2</sup> than the
safe lead tracts at 1.4 people/1000 m<sup>2</sup>. Additionally, these
pink high lead tracts have an estimated median income of $63,431,
whereas the safe lead tracts have an estimated median income of almost
$87,661. Lead exposure can also come through occupation (people exposed
to lead through jobs in fields such as auto repair, mining, pipe
fitting, battery manufacturing, painting, and construction can bring it
home on their clothing), soil, pottery, herbal and folk remedies, the
ingredient tamarind in candy, and cosmetics (“Lead Poisoning” 2022).
Given the significant difference in median income between the pink high
lead tracts and the safe lead tracts, it is possible that residents from
the pink high lead tracts live a different lifestyle than residents in
the safe lead tracts that causes them to be exposed to lead at a higher
rate. Exactly how this lead exposure is happening is a mystery that we
cannot currently solve given the data we have, but the identification of
these somewhat unexpected “high lead” tracts is crucial as it can help
direct resources and information toward these tracts in order to reduce
lead exposure.

## Who is getting tested?

A large factor of obtaining high lead percentages is related to how
often an area is tested. As more tests are issued, it is more likely we
will observe a high lead percentage since the census tract is taking
precautions and responding to factors that already cause EBLLs. It is
interesting that there is a population within “high lead” census tracts
of tracts with newer homes that aren’t getting tested at a high rate. We
defined a “high rate” of testing to be when the number of tests in the
tract is less than the estimated number of children who are 0 to 5 age.
These specific census tracts are shown in yellow on the map below and
seem to be located outside of the cities. We are unsure exactly why this
is, but perhaps it is a result of poor news and communication in terms
of safely precautions for high lead levels.

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-7-1.png)<!-- -->

Doing some further investigation using our binary variables indicative
of high lead and high testing as well as an estimated tract home age
variable, we note some interesting patterns. As we noted with the map
above, there are several tracts with on average newer homes that have
over 1% of tests with EBLLs but are not getting tested at a high rate.
Again, this may be the result of ignorance or delayed news.
Additionally, among the census tracts that have a high testing ratio,
tracts denoted as “high lead” tend to have a significantly higher
estimated home age, which is intuitive as older homes tend to have lead
pipes. Furthermore, looking at the relationship between estimated tract
median income and testing, we see higher income census tracts are
getting tested *less* compared to lower income census tracts. This is
intuitive as lower income census tracts may be more risk in terms of
living in older houses and thus face higher lead exposure.

<img src="README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-8-1.png" width="45%" /><img src="README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-8-2.png" width="45%" />

## Modeling

In the upcoming section, we will be modeling the binary outcome of
whether a census tract is considered to be “high lead” or not. As a
reminder, we denoted a tract as “high lead” if over 1% of tests
contained elevated blood lead levels. The majority of these tracts are
located in the Twin Cities.

## Lasso

We use LASSO logistic regression to distinguish important variables in
predicting census tracts with high lead concentrations. After tuning for
the best penalty, we discovered that income, proportions of homes built
before 1950, testing ratio (number of tests/child aged 0 to 5), number
of tests total, and median age of the census tract are important
variables in modeling the variance of high lead levels. However, it is
difficult to account for spatial correlation using LASSO, so we will not
be interpreting the output and standard errors. Instead, we will take
the important variables LASSO identified and fit a random effect model.
The one exception to this is we will drop variable indicating the total
number of tests and soley use testing ratio, as it is better indicative
of whether the number of tests a tract receives is appropriate for their
population. This random effect model will account for spatial
correlation. Spatial correlation is very important in our study as
census tracts that are close together will share many similar
characteristics in regards to income, community, and more. Leaving this
unaccounted for will result in correlated residuals.

## Matern Random Effect Models

Essentially, a matern random effects model takes into account the
correlation between points via the euclidean distance between
coordinates. Our random effect model accounts for spatial correlation by
incorporating the X and Y coordinates of the centroid, or center, of
each census tract. We are able to do so by creating a numeric factor
representing the coordinates of sampled locations. We fit a constant mu
(smoothness parameter) for easier computational purposes. Because we
have the matern correlation coefficient, we do assume isotropic, meaning
that the covariance function depends only on the computational distance.

We use this model as it is an alternative way to account for spatial
correlation, by imposing a correlation structure on the random effect so
that each census tract are spatially correlated. In absence of the
random effect, neighboring census tracts will have spatially correlated
residuals. When two regions are farther away, we expect the correlation
between them to get lower. Rho is a number that captures the spatial
correlation, therefore a higher value of rho implies more spatial
correlation being captured by the model.

We fit two different models, one with our designated important variables
from LASSO and another with an interaction between the proportion of
homes built before 1950 and a categorical income variable. This
interaction suggests that income plays a different role among high lead
levels conditioned on proportion of hold homes. Perhaps if we are at a
high income level and have high proportion of old homes, we may see
reduced probability of high lead levels due to the ability to renovate.

Now that we have our two models, we can evaluate them. We decided to use
a threshold of 70% to predict if a census tract is to be considered in
the high lead category or not. This means that if the logistic
regression gives us a predicted probability of .70 or higher, we will
make a hard prediction that the census area is high lead. We chose a
threshold of .70 as it is gives us the best sensitivity. In the context
of EBLL, a threshold of 0.70 gives us the most accuracy in correctly
determining a census tract with high lead levels.

The signs of all coefficients make sense. As income increases, the log
odds ratio decreases by -0.16 for every 1000 dollar increase in median
income holding other variables constant. This is in check with our
understanding as the more income a household has, the more likely they
will be able to remodel and replace lead pipes. Additionally, the more
income a census tract has, the more newer houses we may see. The
proportion of homes built before 1950 is the most statistically
significant coefficient. As per the first model, a percentage increase
in a proportion of homes built before 1950 will increase log odds of a
tract being high lead by .22 holding other variables constant. Finally,
the coefficient on the test ratio variable is also positive, indicating
an increase in odds of a census tract being high lead as their test
ratio increases. This is intuitive as tracts that are testing more are
likely doing so because they face higher exposure.

Our interaction terms in the second model were all non-significant.
Meaning, under the model, category of income did not impact high lead
differently despite being conditioned on the proportion of houses built
before 1950. Although all statistically insignificant, income classes
that suffered the most from greater houses built before 1950 were the
census tracts with lowest median income.

Why does our prediction have 100% accuracy? Spatial random effect will
help improve the prediction because it is using neighboring information
to account for that spatial correlation, doing so more in the mean
structure and actually change the prediction, conditioned on random
effects and getting more precise and improved conditions, rather than
marginal mean prediction. Hence why we have a 100% prediction accuracy
for both models, because of the random effect that is able to capture
variations that are unobservant.

<img src="README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-13-1.png" width="45%" /><img src="README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-13-2.png" width="45%" /><img src="README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-13-3.png" width="45%" />

# Modeling the percent of children by census tract with EBLLs

Thus far, we have developed a model to predict whether or not a census
tract will have at least 1% of tests return with an indication of EBLLs.
But its important to acknowledge that not all census tracts that we have
denoted as “high lead” have the same proportion of tests indicating
EBLLs. For the 106 “high lead” tracts, the distribution of the
proportion of tests indicating EBLLs is shown below.

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-14-1.png)<!-- -->

In order to better understand this distribution and what is correlated
with certain tracts having a higher percentage of tests with EBLLs than
others, we will build a model for this percentage using solely the 106
“high lead” tracts. Similar to our logistic model building process to
predict whether or not a tract is “high lead,” we will begin with a
LASSO regression model. Variables that remain in the model after the
shrinkage process can be thought of as most important at helping us
identify why certain tracts have a higher percentage of tests with EBLLs
than others.

Using 10-fold cross validation on our 106 census tracts, the LASSO
modeling process identified tract population, the proportion of homes
built between 1950 and 1969, the proportion of homes built before 1950,
and the estimated mean receipt of supplemental security income (SSI) for
households with children under 18 as the most important predictors of
percentage of tests with EBLLs. Interestingly, population and amount of
SSI both showed a negative relationship with percentage of tests with
EBLLs, meaning more highly populated tracts tend to have a lower
proportion of tests with EBLLs holding other variables constant.
Additionally, tracts receiving more SSI per household tend to have a
lower proportion of tests with EBLLs holding other variables constant.
These relationships are shown in the plots below.

<img src="README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-16-1.png" width="45%" /><img src="README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-16-2.png" width="45%" />

The reasoning for this phenomena could be that such higher populated and
impoverished tracts are viewed “higher risk” for lead exposure and have
received greater resources to prevent it thus far.

Now that we have our model, we can evaluate it. Looking first at our
prediction errors, the model appears relatively solid with a mean
estimated error of 1.5%. While this is good news, our model must also
have residuals that do not have spatial autocorrelation. As we have
discussed, spatial autocorrelation means residuals in one census tract
are related to the residuals in the census tracts around it, which is
problematic because we violate the assumption of independence of
residuals and jeopardize the validity of hypothesis tests. We can test
for spatial autocorrelation with something called the Moran’s I test. In
order to run the Moran’s I test, we must decide in what way we want to
define census tracts as “close.” In other words, we must define a
**neighborhood structure**. There are many options when defining a
neighborhood structure. We can define tracts as neighbors if they touch
at all, even just at one point such as a corner. This is called the
Queen neighborhood structure. Another option is the Rook neighborhood
structure, which defines tracts as neighbors if they share an edge (more
than just a corner). Neighbors can also be defined using distance. The
KNN method calculates the distance between the centers (or centroids) of
each census tract, and then defines a neighborhood based on K nearest
tracts, distanced based on the centers (Heggeseth 2022). Because we are
only looking at census tracts with high lead levels, some tracts do not
touch and thus we will use the KNN structure with 4 neighbors. 4
neighbors gives a nice balance between not having too many neighbors
(which makes census tracts almost always correlated) and not having too
few neighbors, making it harder to pick up on spatial correlation. The
KNN(4) structure is shown below.

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-17-1.png)<!-- -->

Using the Moran’s I test with the KNN(4) structure shown above, there is
very strong evidence to reject our null hypothesis of no spatial
correlation between neighboring tracts. We thus conclude that census
tracts closer together tend to have similar percentages of tests with
EBLLs than census tracts further apart. Given this, we will need to use
a model that accounts for this spatial autocorrelation. Two models that
can potentially accomplish this are the **simultaneous autoregressive
model (SAR)** and the **conditional autoregressive model (CAR)**. These
models are fit in a similar way to an ordinary least squares model as we
predict percent of tests with EBLLs using our selected variables,
however, we add a component to the model that allows us to use
surrounding neighborhood values at varying weights to estimate
percentage of tests with EBLLs for each tract. After fitting both a CAR
and SAR model using the four variables selected by LASSO and the KNN(4)
neighborhood structure, we compared them using BIC and the Moran’s I
test. From the Moran’s I test we learned the SAR model yielded strong
evidence in support of independent residuals. This evidence was
significantly weaker for the CAR model, implying remaining spatial
autocorrelation in the residuals. The BIC (a criterion used for model
selection) was also superior for the SAR model in comparison to the CAR
model, and thus we decided to proceed with the SAR structure. While we
tested multiple other SAR models with different combinations of
explanatory variables, the model with the four variables selected by
LASS0 proved our best model with the lowest average prediction error
(about 1.4%).

While the average predictor error of our model is relatively small at
1.4%, one obvious downfall of this model is that it did not predict any
census tract to have a percent of tests with EBLLs above 5.6%, as seen
below. In reality - as shown in the dotplot earlier in this modeling
section - seven tracts had a percent of tests with EBLLs over 6% and two
tracts had levels over 10%. Thus, our model does not quite capture as
large of a distribution in tract percentages as well as we might have
liked.

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-20-1.png)<!-- -->

Despite this, our model does indeed do a good job of not systematically
over or under-predicting particular areas of the Twin Cities
metropolitan area. We see that tracts both inside and outside city
limits have a mix of positive and negative residuals and there are
several areas where percent of tests with EBLLs are over predicted in
one tract and under predicted in its neighboring tract. Given the strong
evidence that spatial autocorrelation was accounted for from the Moran’s
I test, this is not surprising.

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-21-1.png)<!-- -->

The biggest takeaway from our model is what we can learn about lead
exposure patterns using it. Takeaways are generally similar to the LASSO
regression model we fit, but we now have more certainty in our
coefficient estimates and their significance given we are not breaking
the assumption of independent residuals. The two significant
coefficients on the *α* = 0.05 level in our model are tract population
and the proportion of homes built from 1950 to 1969 in each tract. With
regard to population, we estimate for every additional 1000 people
residing in a tract that the proportion of tests with EBLLs falls on
average 0.4%, holding other variables constant. Given that census tracts
are intended to have similar populations (ideally \~4000 people), this
might not seem practically significant at first. However, the 106 “high
lead” tracts have populations ranging from about 2,000 to over 10,000
people per tract, with the majority falling in the 3000 to 6000 range.
Thus, comparing a 6,000 resident to 3,000 resident tract, we’d expect
the 6,000 resident tract to have a percent of tests with EBLLs about
1.2% lower than that of the 3,000 resident tract, which is a
considerable difference. When looking at our second significant
variable, we learn that with every 10% increase in the proportion of
homes built between 1950 and 1969 we can expect the percent of tests
with EBLLs to decrease about 0.4%, holding other variables constant.
This relationship is shown in the graph below on the left and is rather
interesting when contrasted to the graph on the right, which displays
proportion of homes built before 1950 versus percent of tests with EBLLs
for “high lead” tracts. The key takeaway here is that as tracts tend to
have more homes built between 1950-1969, **their percent of tests with
EBLLs tends to fall**, while as tracts tend to have more homes built
prior to 1950 their **percent of tests with EBLLs tends to rise**. Given
that lead paint was not banned in the United States until 1978, this
contrasting relationship is surprising and implies lead paint is not the
sole factor causing tracts to have a high percent of tests with EBLLs.

<img src="README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-22-1.png" width="45%" /><img src="README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-22-2.png" width="45%" />

To learn a little more about what might be happening, we created the
following graph which shows the remaining home age distribution for high
lead tracts based on the proportion of homes built from 1950-1969. We
see that tracts with very few homes (less than 20%) built from 1950-1969
are composed on average by over 50% of homes built before 1950. These
tracts also have the smallest proportion of homes built from 1970-1989.
As the proportion of home built 1950-1969 increases, the proportion of
homes built before 1950 in the tract decreases and the proportion of
homes built 1970-1989 increases. This implies overall higher average
home age and helps to explain why we see that relationship we see in our
model.

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-23-1.png)<!-- -->

The SSI and proportion of homes built before 1950 variables are both
insignificant in this model, though have coefficient directions that
make intuitive sense given what we have discussed thus far. Holding
other variables constant, as the proportion of homes in a tract built
prior to 1950 increases, the percent of tests with EBLLs in that tract
increases. Additionally, as discussed when interpreting the LASSO model,
tracts receiving more SSI tend to have a lower percentage of tests with
EBLLs holding other variables constant.

# Limitations

One of the main limitations in our analysis was data. While we are
incredibly thankful to have access to public lead data and demographics
on the census tract level, we had been hoping to complete a
spatial-temporal analysis looking at the percent of tests with EBLLs in
each tract each year dating back to the early 2000s. Unfortunately, the
Minnesota Department of Health did not have this data on hand. An
additional goal of our was to look at building-specific data available
through ArcGIS on lead piping for the St. Paul Regional Water Services
(SPRWS) area and incorporate it into our analysis. However, we ran out
of time to learn how to web scrape this and so this will be a task for
the near future. One other limitation related to the data for this
project is that many of the variables we used are estimates. For
example, mean tract age is estimated from ACS and census data. Home
values come from government valuations which is done for tax purposes.
The fact that there is likely a fair amount of error in these estimates
should be taken into account when interpreting model coefficients. Also
related to the topic of modeling is that fact that no neighborhood
structure we choose is going to be perfect. For example, we chose to use
the KNN(4) neighborhood structure for our models, which defines four
neighbors for every tract using distances between tract centroids.
However, it is possible that tracts could be similar in other ways.
Tracts close in distance could be incredibly different due to a highway
running between them, while tracts further apart but both bordering the
river could actually be more similar.

Furthermore, our models will not be the best to predict new data outside
of our dataset. If we have a new census tract added, it will be
difficult to account for the spatial correlation. The new observation
may be farther away in distance that it will become independent and we
will not gain the extra predictive ability. However, we can use the
distributions from the matern random effect models to attempt in making
a prediction for a new area. Unfortunately, we are not able to explain
everything.

# Conclusions

Throughout our research report, we focused on what seems to be
correlated to high lead levels. We anlyzed data from the **7-county Twin
Cities metropolitan area** using public data provided by the **Minnesota
Department of Health** over the period of 2015-2019 (Health, n.d.). We
fit LASSO models to pick out “important” variables and utilize different
spatial correlation regressions to obtain accurate standard errors on
the coefficients.

Overall, the age of homes in the tract and median income of census
tracts seem to be the most important factors when looking at the
variation in high lead levels. This is intuitive as old houses,
mentioned earlier, tend to have older pipes, more dust, paint chips, all
of which have a causal effect leading to high lead levels. Among houses
with high lead levels, as tract population increases and proportions of
homes built between 1950-1969 increases we see that the percent of tests
returning EBLLs decreases holding other variables constant.

Furthermore among census tracts with high lead exposure, there is a
specific subgroup of tracts that do not test often (test less than once
per child) and have a new home age. This is potentially dangerous as
families living in these census tracts may go on about their routine
thinking living in a newer household is safe when in reality there may
be other factors that contribute to high lead exposure. This is
especially concerning as testing rates tend to be lower and the percent
of tests with EBLLs are higher in these census tracts. For future
research, it will be worthwhile to investigate which census tracts are
getting tested more often than others and look into other observable
factors that may capture the culture within a census tract with regards
to lead levels.

# Acknowledgements

We thank the Minnesota Department of Health and creators of the
tidycensus package for providing publicly available data that made our
work possible. We also give a big thank you to our professor Brianna
Heggeseth for teaching us the mapping and modeling techniques used in
this analysis, as well as for providing support and resources throughout
this project.

# References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-saintpaul" class="csl-entry">

n.d. *Saint Paul Minnesota*.
<https://www.stpaul.gov/news/saint-paul-announces-145-million-investment-replace-lead-pipes>.

</div>

<div id="ref-leadoverview" class="csl-entry">

“Annual Elevated Blood Lead Levels.” 2020. *Childhood Lead Exposure:
Annual Blood Lead Levels - MN Data*.
<https://data.web.health.state.mn.us/lead_annual_level>.

</div>

<div id="ref-washHealth" class="csl-entry">

“Common Sources of Lead Poisoning.” n.d. *Washington State Department of
Health*.
<https://doh.wa.gov/you-and-your-family/healthy-home/home-contaminants/lead/common-sources-lead-poisoning>.

</div>

<div id="ref-mdhdata" class="csl-entry">

Health, Minnesota Department of. n.d. *Childhood Lead Exposure Map: MNPH
Data Access - MN Dept. Of Health*.
<https://mndatamaps.web.health.state.mn.us/interactive/leadtract.html>.

</div>

<div id="ref-heggeseth_2022" class="csl-entry">

Heggeseth, Brianna. 2022. “Correlated Data Notes.” *Brianna C.
Heggeseth*. <https://bcheggeseth.github.io/CorrelatedData/index.html>.

</div>

<div id="ref-mayo" class="csl-entry">

“Lead Poisoning.” 2022. *Mayo Clinic*. Mayo Foundation for Medical
Education; Research.
<https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/lead-poisoning/symptoms-causes/syc-20354717>.

</div>

<div id="ref-cdcPrevention" class="csl-entry">

“Prevent Children’s Exposure to Lead.” 2021. *Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention*. Centers for Disease Control; Prevention.
<https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/features/leadpoisoning/index.html>.

</div>

<div id="ref-tidycensus" class="csl-entry">

Walker, Kyle, and Matt Herman. 2022. *Tidycensus: Load US Census
Boundary and Attribute Data as ’Tidyverse’ and ’Sf’-Ready Data Frames*.
<https://walker-data.com/tidycensus/>.

</div>

</div>
